---
layout: post
tags: skills management
title: TASKS
date: 2023-06-21
author: Jonatas
lenght: 1
---

# Tasks and Responsibilities

While reviewing my job description, I came up to this list of tasks. So let’s expand a little on each one of them:

What you’ll do…

Engineering Manager Tasks:
·       Manage, guide, and coach engineers to be their best
·       Be responsible for improving velocity, quality, and process for your engineering teams
·       Help to establish learning and career growth plans for engineers that report to you
·       Align individual developer goals with company goals to facilitate growth of both the business and developers
·       Bring a passion to stay on top of industry trends, participate in internal and external technical communities
·       Collaborate with senior leaders to find business initiatives and communicate where individual contributors can help
·       Report on development status, system performance, and quality to senior management
·       Deliver regular one-on-one time with engineers in the form of career coaching sessions, as well as regular touchbases
·       Optimize onboarding and offboarding processes within engineering
·       Regularly review engineers’ work, providing guidance and actionable feedback
·       Conduct annual performance reviews for your direct reports and make suggestions and arguments for promotions and salary increases
·       Participate in the hiring process, creating job descriptions, conducting interviews, and evaluating candidates
·       Deliver valuable and direct feedback to your reports in a collaborative way




**Manage, guide, and coach engineers to be their best**

Manage definition: be in charge of, administer, run and maintain control or influence.
 
It is my job to keep an eye on every developer in my team, check if they show up for work, if they complete their tasks, close their tickets, provide feedback and report work status and most importantly get the work done. But it is also my job to guide and coach them to achieve their best, improve, and perform at a higher level.



**Be responsible for improving velocity, quality, and process for your engineering teams**

The keyword here is "improving" - I am here to help you do your job better, with less stress and high quality that I trust you can do it. If you fail, I am responsible for it too. Just like your parents woke you up for school and you didn’t like it, but you have to go. If you want to keep your job, wake up, show up for work and get the job done!


**Help to establish learning and career growth plans for engineers that report to you**

I am here to help you learn and grow in your career, build a growth plan that is aligned with the company goals.
And by that I mean not only the skills you need to complete your job easily and bug free but also how that will help you grow in your career. How you can be promoted, become a senior engineer and so on.



**Align individual developer goals with company goals to facilitate growth of both the business and developers**

True, I can only help you if your goals are aligned with the company that pays your salary. Clear example: we are a Angular + C# software company. Our codebase is 98% based on that. So, unless there are really good reasons, I don’t see a way that I can help you learn Java or help you become a professional dancer. There are nuances to that, where maybe learning game development (or gamification) can help us increase our engagement with our clients but all translate to how something you do or learn can help the company too.


**Bring a passion to stay on top of industry trends, participate in internal and external technical communities**

This is more like a personality trait (in my point of view) where you are passionate about what you do, want to know about new trends and stay tuned for new and exciting breakthroughs in our domain (AI for example). Participating in internal and external communities, as I discussed with my Manager, is not possible at this point provided the amount of workload we have on a daily basis.

**Collaborate with senior leaders to find business initiatives and communicate where individual contributors can help**

On a regular basis during meetings or presentations, I need to interact with senior leaders and stakeholders, providing status updates, contribute to or give technical advice. 


**Report on development status, system performance, and quality to senior management**

Creating reports, collecting data from Jira, Github and team meetings is an important part of the job. At the end of the day, the senior management team wants to know if their investment in time and money will pay off. For that reason I need to know what developers and teams are working on. 


**Deliver regular one-on-one time with engineers in the form of career coaching sessions, as well as regular touchbases**

Sometimes regular one-on-one meetings may seem like a waste of time or just chit-chat, but they are important tools for the manager to connect with their reports, get insights and plan action items. Feel free to share whatever you like, being about work or your personal life - we are humans!


**Optimize onboarding and offboarding processes within engineering**

Research shows that onboarding has a big impact on employee success at the company, so that is one area that we need to focus on. Onboarding is done using a couple of strategies such as documents and guides on Confluence, pair programming and code review sessions, meetings with the engineering manager, with different team members and other teams.


**Regularly review engineers’ work, providing guidance and actionable feedback**

Even though a manager will not always have the time and knowledge to review every single piece of work from every developer, this is an important task that will help the manager to assess, analyze and judge a developer’s technical skills. It is important to see if the developer is following best practices, design patterns and writing "Clean Code". 
Also, engineers’ work is not limited to code only - it may require preparing presentations, filling up administrative forms, surveys, weekly check-ins, report charts, Jira tickets and so on. Feedback can also be given regarding a person’s hard or soft skills.



**Conduct annual performance reviews for your direct reports and make suggestions and arguments for promotions and salary increases**

During the annual performance review we consolidate strengths, wins and any improvement areas in one place using the information collected in the previous item, status reports and daily observations.
We also use that output for promotion and salary increases recommendations. It is important to mention that the performance review is just one piece of the puzzle for promotion and salary increases. There are much more to consider such as the company budget, inflation, market salary research and so on. This means that there is no guarantee that a good performance review will lead to salary increase.



**Participate in the hiring process, creating job descriptions, conducting interviews, and evaluating candidates**

This is a big and important one. A good job description will bring clarity and clear expectations for your role.
The personalities and skills of team members in an team can determine the sucess or failure for that team and for that reason it is importan to have and keep them.
Interviewing and hiring require a set of hard and soft skills plus some intuituion to get the better results.


A good job description will bring clarity and clear expectations for the role. Interviewing and hiring require a set of hard and soft skills plus some intuition to get the better results. Aligning the candidate’s skills and personality to the team can determine the success or failure for both.


**Deliver valuable and direct feedback to your reports in a collaborative way**

This is the most difficult one. Communication is a skill that requires constant study, practice and improvement. Listening is another one. Still a lot to learn on this subject for me.

